udgacchatastava karādamṛtaṃ haratsu
daityeṣu tānaśaraṇānanunīya devān |
sadyastirodadhitha deva bhavatprabhāvā-
dudyatsvayūthyakalahā ditijā babhūvu: ||1||
udgacchata:-tava	from Thy (hands) when emerging from the ocean
karāt-amṛtaṃ haratsu	from the hands, snatching the nectar
daityeṣu	the Asuras,
tān-aśaraṇān-anunīya devān	to those helpless Devas giving solace
sadya:-tirodadhitha deva	immediately Thou disappeared O Lord!
bhavat-prabhāvāt-	(and) by Thy prompting
udyat-sva-yūthya-kalahā	(there) arose among their own group of (the Asuras) a quarrel
ditijā babhūvu:	the Asuras became thus
Thou emerged from the ocean as Dhanvantari holding the pot of nectar which the Asuras snatched from Thy hands. The devas became helpless. After consoling them, Thou immediately disappeared. O Lord! Then prompted by Thy Maayaa the Asuras started to quarrel amongst themselves.
śyāmāṃ rucā'pi vayasā'pi tanuṃ tadānīṃ
prāpto'si tuṅgakucamaṇḍalabhaṃgurāṃ tvam |
pīyūṣakumbhakalahaṃ parimucya sarve
tṛṣṇākulā: pratiyayustvadurojakumbhe ||2||
śyāmāṃ	beautiful and youthful
rucā-api vayasā-api	by complexion and by age
tanuṃ tadānīṃ prāpta:-asi	(Thou) took the form then
tuṅga-kuca-maṇḍala-bhaṃgurāṃ	due to the weight of the high breasts which was bent
tvam	Thee
pīyūṣa-kumbha-kalaham	for the nectar pot the fight
parimucya sarve	abandoning everyone
tṛṣṇā-ākulā:	thirsting (infatuated)
pratiyayu:-	approached
tvat-uroja-kumbhe	Thy pot-like breasts
Thou then took the form of a beautiful young maiden - beautiful by complexion, young by age, whose frame was bent due to the weight of her high heavy breasts. All the Asuras abandoned their quarrel about the pot of nectar, and thirstily approached Thee infatuated by the sight of Thy pot-like breasts.
kā tvaṃ mṛgākṣi vibhajasva sudhāmimāmi-
tyārūḍharāgavivaśānabhiyācato'mūn |
viśvasyate mayi kathaṃ kulaṭā'smi daityā
ityālapannapi suviśvasitānatānī: ||3||
kā tvaṃ mṛgākṣi	Who are you, O doe-eyed one?
vibhajasva sudhām-imām-	distribute this nectar'
iti-ārūḍha-rāga-vivaśān-	thus, helpless and overcome with passion
abhiyācita:-amūn	they begged thus to her
viśvasyate mayi kathaṃ	trust me, how can you?
kulaṭā-asmi daityā	I am a whore, O Asuras!'
iti-ālapan-api	even when saying thus,
suviśvasitān-atānī:	Thou made them trust Thee
O doe-eyed lady, who are you? Distribute this nectar', entreated the Asuras, helplessly being overcome by passion. 'How do you trust me? O Asuras, as I am a whore.' Even though Thou said so, Thou commanded their trust.
modāt sudhākalaśameṣu dadatsu sā tvaṃ
duśceṣṭitaṃ mama sahadhvamiti bruvāṇā |
paṅktiprabhedaviniveśitadevadaityā
līlāvilāsagatibhi: samadā: sudhāṃ tām ||4||
modāt sudhā-kalaśam-	with joy when the nectar pot
eṣu dadatsu	was given by them
sā tvaṃ	Thee (in the form of) her (Mohini)
duśceṣṭitaṃ mama sahadhvam-	(please) bear with my wrong deeds
iti bruvāṇā	saying so
paṅkti-prabheda-	in separated rows
viniveśita-deva-daityā	were made to sit the Devas and The Asuras
līlā-vilāsa-gatibhi:	with sportive and charming gait
samadā: sudhā tām	distributed that nectar
Readily and joyfully the pot of nectar was handed over to Thee, as Mohini. Asking them to bear with Thee, Thy wrong deed, Thou made the Devas and Asuras sit in separate rows. Holding the Asuras infatuated and spellbound by the charming and sportive gait, Thou served the nectar.
asmāsviyaṃ praṇayiṇītyasureṣu teṣu
joṣaṃ sthiteṣvatha samāpya sudhāṃ sureṣu |
tvaṃ bhaktalokavaśago nijarūpametya
svarbhānumardhaparipītasudhaṃ vyalāvī: ||5||
asmāsu-iyaṃ praṇayinī-	us she is fond of
iti-asureṣu teṣu	when the Asuras were (wrongfully contemplating)
joṣaṃ sthiteṣu-atha	and so were waiting silently, then
samāpya sudhāṃ sureṣu	Thou finished the nectar among the Devas
tvaṃ bhaktaloka-vaśaga:	Thee, who are ever favourable to Thy devotees
nija-rūpam-etya	assuming Thy own form (then)
svarbhānum-ardhapīta-sudhaṃ	the Asura Raahu, who had drunk half of the nectar
vyalāvī:	beheaded
When the Asuras were wrongfully contemplating that Thou as Mohini were fond of them, and so were waiting silently, Thou finished the nectar among the Devas, as Thou always favour Thy devotees. Then Thou took Thy own form, and beheaded the Asura Raahu who had drunk half of the nectar served to him which he cunningly got by sitting in the row of the Devas.
tvatta: sudhāharaṇayogyaphalaṃ pareṣu
datvā gate tvayi surai: khalu te vyagṛhṇan |
ghore'tha mūrchati raṇe balidaityamāyā-
vyāmohite suragaṇe tvamihāvirāsī: ||6||
tvatta: sudhā-haraṇa-	from Thee for snatching the nectar
yogya-phalaṃ pareṣu datvā	and giving them the appropriate result
gate tvayi	when Thou had departed
surai: khalu te vyagṛhṇan	indeed with the Devas they started a fight
ghore-atha mūrchati raṇe	in the thick of the battle, when they ( the Devas) fainted
bali-daitya-māyā-vyāmohite	by the magical arts of the Asura Bali,
suragaṇe	the Devas
tvam-iha-āvirāsī:	Thee in the midst reappeared
Having meted out to the Asuras the punishment for snatching away the pot of nectar from thy hands, Thou departed.The Asuras again started a fight with the devas. In the thick of the fierce battle, the Devas were reduced to a state of swoon by the Asura Bali's magical arts.Thou then reappeared in the battle field.
tvaṃ kālanemimatha mālimukhāñjaghantha
śakro jaghāna balijambhavalān sapākān |
śuṣkārdraduṣkaravadhe namucau ca lūne
phenena nāradagirā nyaruṇo raṇaṃ tvaṃ ||7||
tvaṃ kālanemim-	Thou (killed) Kaalanemi,
atha mālimukhān-jaghantha	then (Thou) Maali and others killed
śakro jaghāna	Indra killed
bali-jambha-valān sapākān	Bali, Jaambvaan, Vaali, Paaka, along with others
śuṣka-ārdra-duṣkara-vadhe	by dry (solid) or wet (liquid) (weapons) could not be killed
namucau ca	and (such a) Naamuchi
lūne phenena	was destroyed by a (weapon made of ) foam
nārada-girā	then by the advice of Naarada
nyaruṇa: raṇaṃ tvam	Thou stopped the battle
In the battle Thou killed Kaalnemi, Maali and other Asuras. Indra killed Bali, Jaambvaan, Vaali, along with Paakaasura. Naamuchi who could not be killed by either dry or wet weapons was cut off by a weapon made of foam. Thou then stopped the battle on the advice of Naarada.
yoṣāvapurdanujamohanamāhitaṃ te
śrutvā vilokanakutūhalavān maheśa: |
bhūtaissamaṃ girijayā ca gata: padaṃ te
stutvā'bravīdabhimataṃ tvamatho tirodhā: ||8||
yoṣā-vapu:-	the female form
danuja-mohanam-	to delude the Asuras
āhitaṃ te	assumed by Thee
śrutvā	hearing about it
vilokana-kutūhalavān maheśa:	to see it, Shiva became eager
bhūtai:-samaṃ	with his attendants
girijayā ca	and with Umaa
gata: padaṃ te	(Shiva) went to Thy abode
stutvā-abravīt	praying Thee, he said
abhimataṃ	his desire
tvam-atha tirodhā:	Thou then disappeared
Shiva heard of Thy female form which Thou had taken to delude the Asuras and was eager to see it. He therefore went to Thy abode along with Umaa and the Bhootas. He beseeched Thee with hymns and praises and stated his purpose of visit. Thou then immediately disappeared.
ārāmasīmani ca kandukaghātalīlā-
lolāyamānanayanāṃ kamanīṃ manojñām |
tvāmeṣa vīkṣya vigaladvasanāṃ manobhū-
vegādanaṅgaripuraṅga samāliliṅga ||9||
ārāma-sīmani	in a portion of the garden
ca kanduka-ghāta-līlā-	and playing by hitting the ball
lolāyamāna-nayanāṃ	with eyes moving about
kamanīṃ manojñām	a female form which was very captivating
tvām-eṣa vīkṣya	He (Shiva) seeing Thee
vigalat-vasanām	whose clothes were slipping away
manobhū-vegāt-	by the force of infatuation
anṅgaripu:-	the conqueror of Kaamdeva (Shiva)
aṅga	O Lord!
samāliliṅga	embraced (Thee)
In the far portion of the garden, Shiva saw Thee in the form of a most beautiful damsel, whose eyes roamed about as she played with a ball. Her robes were slipping down in the course of the movements. The conqueror of Kaamdeva, Shiva, was so overcome by desire that he embraced Thee.
bhūyo'pi vidrutavatīmupadhāvya devo
vīryapramokṣavikasatparamārthabodha: |
tvanmānitastava mahattvamuvāca devyai
tattādṛśastvamava vātaniketanātha ||10||
bhūya:-api	even again
vidrutavatīm-upadhāvya	following her who was running away
deva:	Shiva
vīrya-pramokṣa-	having released his seed
vikasat-param-artha-bodha:	gained the knowledge of truth
tvat-mānita:-	honoured by Thee
tava mahattvam-	Thy greatness
uvāca devyai	he told to Devi (Umaa)
tat-tādṛśa:-tvam-	Thou who are like that
ava	protect me
vātaniketanātha	O Lord Of Guruvaayur!
Shiva pursued Mohini who was running away. He obtained knowledge of the pure self, only as his seed escaped. After being honoured by Thee, he narrated Thy greatness to Umaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Of such greatness, protect me.